There is something so uniquely powerful
about an artist's final painting. A
painting made only weeks, days, or even
hours before death begins to feel
different. It's almost like every brush
stroke feels heavier. Every color, every
symbol, every silence on the canvas
starts to feel charged with meaning,
whether the artist intended it that way
or not. And I found myself returning to
these final works time and time again.
They seem to offer me something more
than just art history. They feel like
glimpses of how a human being confronts
the edge of life itself. Whether it was
Francis Bacon painting study of a bull
while he was gravely ill with pneumonia
or Freda Carlos Watermelon's painting
she finished just days before her death.
These works do not simply show us what
an artist saw. They show us what an
artist left behind. Death is something
all of us move towards. Yet almost none
of us truly understand. We avoid it. We
fear it. We struggle to imagine it. But
artists spend their lives trying to give
form to things that are difficult to
explain like our deepest fears, our
grief, love, and desire. And so when
they reach the final chapter of their
lives and still feel compelled to make
one more image, I think these are worth
paying very close attention to because
final paintings often reveal something
deeper than a life story. Sometimes they
feel fragmented, sometimes peaceful,
sometimes unfinished. Sometimes they
seem to resist death, whilst others seem
to quietly accept it, but almost always
they leave behind some trace of how a
human soul responds to its own
impermanence.
In today's video, I don't want to
sensationalize death here and not turn
these artists into tragic myths, but to
look closely at what their final
paintings might reveal, not just about
their lives, but maybe our own lives as
well. Because as sad as these works can
be, I also think they can move us in a
strangely lifeaffirming direction. They
remind us that mortality does not only
cast a shadow over life. It also makes
life feel more precious. But of course,
and it probably goes without saying,
death can be a very sensitive and
uncomfortable topic for a lot of people.
So, a slight trigger warning if you just
stumbled across this video. Should you
choose to keep watching, then a warm
welcome to you. I invite you to explore
some of the most powerful final
paintings by famous artists and try to
understand what makes them so haunting,
so revealing and so enduring.
The first painting we'll be looking at
is called Tree Roots by the one and only
Vincent Van Gogh or Vincent Van Hawk,
which I've been made aware is the
correct Dutch pronunciation, but as I've
stated in past videos, I can't keep that
up for too long, so I'll be sticking
with Van Go for this video. Hope you'll
forgive me. Tree Roots was painted in
July 1890, the same month and year that
Van Go died, and which many art
historians believe to be unfinished. A
lot of us know well that Van Go did
self-portraits as well as landscapes,
but we're not treated with an obvious
final self-portrait here. There's no
symbolic sunset either. No dramatic
farewell scene. Instead, Van Gogh gives
us a bank of roots, trunks, dirt, and
undergrowth said to be situated in Orair
Suis on the northwestern outskirts of
Paris. For years, people preferred the
myth that the wheat field with crows
painting was his final work because it
looked more obviously tragic. The dark
stormy sky and the flock of crows flying
in no particular direction, frequently
interpreted as harbingers of death, doom
or premonitions creates an unmistakable
sense of anxiety and forboding. But the
Van Go Museum considers tree roots the
more likely final painting. partly
because the work is believed to have
been painted on the very same day he
tragically took his own life. Therefore,
we're looking at a painting not only
made in the same month and year of the
artist's death, but it is also widely
thought that Van Gogh worked on this
canvas for only 3 to 4 hours, likely
stopping in the late afternoon before
his final moments. There is also the
case of several areas of a painting
where the raw linen or underpainting is
visible, suggesting the artist did not
return to apply the final layers of
color. Moreover, while some parts are
thickly painted, which in art
terminology is known as impasto, others
look like they remain in a preliminary
sketch-like stage. In the last 70 days
of his life outside of Paris, Van Gogh
produced an astonishing 74 works
painting with almost feverish intensity.
Even in his final days, Van Gogh did not
stop working. Even then, he was still
wrestling with vision, his imagination,
and still trying to see something from
his surroundings.
Researchers have even identified the
exact spot where he painted tree roots
in Rude Doorbingi only 150 m from the
Uber Ravu where he was staying. In other
words, this image was not imagined in
some secluded studio. It was pulled
directly out of the ground beneath his
feet. In essence, whether he knew it or
not, Van Gogh was soaking up the world
around him, which he captured so
beautifully throughout his painting life
one last time. And visually, the
painting refused to let us stand at a
safe distance. Van Go seems to hold us
right up close against the earth itself.
The roots knot, twist, snag, and lurch
across the canvas until they stop
feeling like roots at all and start
feeling more like nerves, veins,
muscles, maybe even wounded limbs. The
whole image feels claustrophobic, as if
nature has been pushed up so close to
the eye that it begins to lose its
identity. In my opinion, I think that is
part of what gives this work an oddly
modern feel. The Van Go Museum notes
that it's almost unrecognizable forms,
aggressive lines, and vivid color have
often led people to see Van Go as a
forerunner of more modern abstract art.
And you can really see that in the
creatively colored and chaotic brush
strokes. This is a still painting of
nature, but nature is no longer calm or
legible. Here, it's on the edge of
becoming pure sensation. The subject
starts to dissolve into rhythm,
pressure, color, and impact. But this is
where the painting becomes more
complicated than a simple image to break
down. You see, because for all of its
instability, tree roots is not dead in
color. It's strangely alive. The blues
are electric. The greens flare and
pulse. The ochres and creams are sunlit
rather than
this is worth noting as the
brother-in-law of Theo Van Go later
described the scene painted on the
morning before Vincent's death as
something called subwo meaning a
woodland scene that's full of sun and
life. To me that suggests that even at
the edge of despair, Van Go was still
looking not only at suffering but at
vitality and how both can go hand in
hand. And there is an even deeper
resonance we can look at here. Back in
1882, years before this final period,
Van Gogh wrote about an earlier study of
tree roots and said he wanted to express
something of life's struggle. Roots
gripping the earth frantically while
also seeming half torn up by the storm.
Sadly, there is no hard evidence that he
consciously repeated that symbolism in
tree roots in his final hours. But it's
very difficult not to hear an echo
because that is exactly what this
painting looks like. We have both a
picture of nature and all its beauty but
also the aftertastes of its cyclical
nature. How nature is an overlapping
process of coming into being then
wilting away. A chaotic entanglement of
lifebringing death and death bringing
life. And that to me is what makes Tree
Roots so devastating. We know from a Van
Go museum's account of his final days
that his mental health had worsened in
July and that he felt increasingly
lonely and uncertain about the future.
But this canvas does not read like
someone surrendering to emptiness. To
me, it reads like someone still locked
in struggle, still gripping, still
pushing, and still seeing the world with
almost unbearable intensity.
There is also something chilling about
the fact that researchers say the
sunlight in the painting suggests the
last brush strokes were laid down toward
the end of the afternoon. And the
museum's 2021 note describes the work as
painted only hours before Van Go took
his own life. So this is not just a late
work we're looking at here. It's a work
made in terrible proximity to the end.
And yet what he chose to paint was not
morbid oblivion. What do we know about
roots exactly? We know roots to be the
life source of trees and plants. They
cling and borrow deep into the ground,
essentially anchoring themselves to the
world of existence, refusing to let go.
And maybe that is why tree roots lingers
so powerfully because it does not give
us closure. Instead, what we're left
with is that entanglement of life and
death. It gives us a world where life
and collapse are happening right at the
same time. The forms seem to come apart,
but they are also holding together. The
painting feels unfinished, but
emotionally it feels complete in a
different way. Almost like a final
version of existence itself as struggle,
growth, confusion, sunlight, and pain
all knotted into one surface. And that
may be the most unsettling thing of all
about this painting. Van Go's last image
was not of death arriving. It was of
life still fighting in the dirt. still
holding on, making the absolute tragic
death of Vincent Van Gogh more tangible
and visceral when paired with this
monumental final work of his.
For this next painting, I want us to
jump back even further in time to the
1500s during the short but prominent era
of art known as the High Renaissance
period. This biblically themed painting
is titled Transfiguration, painted by
the Italian master Raphael, who worked
on this piece during the years preceding
his death in 1520.
What makes transfiguration such an
intriguing final work is that it does
not look like a farewell in the way that
we might expect. It does not feel
hushed, intimate, or resigned. In fact,
it almost feels split in two. Above, we
can see Christ rises weightlessly in
blinding light between what is said to
be the prophets Moses on the right and
Elijah on the left, while Peter, James,
and John shield their eyes from a
radiance. To the far left, we see two
kneeling figures commonly theorized to
be Justice and Pastor who shared the 6th
of August as a feast day with the feast
of transfiguration.
Then, as we look below, everything is
turmoil. A possessed boy twists in
anguish. A crowd points in his direction
and surges around him with what appear
to be the remaining apostles arguing and
gesturing dramatically in the midst of
it all.
The Vatican Museum describes the
painting as two successive episodes from
the Gospel of Matthew fused into one
alterpiece. And other sources note that
this double narrative was unusual enough
to provoke centuries of interpretations
from countless writers including Gerta
and Ner. And that division is the first
thing that makes this painting so
impactful. The top half is all clarity,
revelation, transcendence. The bottom
half is confusion, suffering, and human
limitation.
In other words, Raphael constructs a
painting where divine truth is visible,
but only partially accessible. Heaven is
right there, blazing above the scene,
and yet the people below are still
trapped in panic, misrecognition, fear,
and pain. An article I came across on
Smart History notes that many art
historians read the pairing of these
scenes as two sides of the same theme.
Divine grace above, human failure below.
That interpretation feels especially
compelling because almost every gesture
in the lower half seems to reach upward
towards a solution that has not yet
fully arrived. That is where the
painting becomes more than just a
biblical illustration. It becomes almost
a map of spiritual frustration. The boy
at the bottom is not simply in ill
health. He becomes the visual center of
disorder itself.
His body is contorted. His eyes are wild
and everyone around him seems to be
caught up in a shock wave of his
suffering. Raphael gives us a crowd full
of motion. But no one can actually
resolve anything. The apostles cannot
heal him. The onlookers cannot
understand him. Even the pointing hands
seem caught in a circuit of desperation,
chaotically pointing in random
directions for people to aim their hope
or their anger towards. I feel Raphael
is showing us here that only Christ can
restore order, but Christ is still
above, still separate, still distant.
The miracle in a sense has been delayed
and Raphael makes us experience that
delay. What is especially striking
though is that this tension comes from
an artist long associated with harmony,
balance, and ideal beauty. Britannica
describes transfiguration as combining
formal polish and elegance with an
atmosphere of tension and violence
carried by the agitated gestures of
tightly packed figures and even suggests
that the work points forward towards
mannerism. Another art movement that
originated in Florence and Rome
literally as a reaction to the
harmonious ideals of high renaissance
masters. Raphael being one of those
masters. And if you simply Google search
the mannerism art period timeline, a lot
of sources say it starts in the year
1520, the same year of Raphael's death.
So this is quite a remarkable thing to
consider here because it means that in
one of his last great works, the serene
equilibrium of the high renaissance art
Raphael was renowned for is beginning to
strain from within. The order is still
there technically speaking. I mean the
composition is brilliant, but
emotionally the painting is unstable.
Things start to distort a little, which
is exactly what mannerism is. typically
characterized by elongated distorted
human figures, artificial colors, and
complex theatrical compositions. It's
essentially when artists prioritized
intellectual sophistication, virtuosity,
and emotional expression over the more
naturalistic realism you'll find in High
Renaissance art. So yeah, from a purely
nerdy art fan perspective here, it
really is amazing to think that it's
possible Raphael, already a highly
respected master of high renaissance
style of art with his last ever
painting, potentially kickstarted the
next popular style of European art that
continued right up to the end of the
16th century. I mean, that would be
quite a legacy. Now, earlier we saw Van
Go's tree roots felt like the world
dissolving into raw sensation. Raphael's
transfiguration, by contrast, feels like
a supreme classical mind painting the
moment when order no longer seems
sufficient. It does not give us a single
unified miracle. He gives us a world
divided between revelation and
catastrophe, between light and disorder,
between what humanity longs for and what
it can actually grasp. This is not the
image of an artist collapsing
psychologically in the later way
romantic myth might prefer. It is
perhaps even more powerful. It could be
viewed as the image of an artist at the
height of control painting a universe in
which control has limits. The
circumstances around the painting
intensify all this. The work was
commissioned by Cardinal Medici, later
Pope Clement IIIth for Nabong Cathedral
in implicit competition with Sebastiano
delpo's raising of Lazarus. But Raphael
died in 1520 before transfiguration was
fully finished. Sources such as the
British Museum state that it was left
unfinished at his death and completed
shortly afterward by Gileio Romano.
Instead of being sent to France, it
remained in Rome. The National Gallery
notes that his first display was above
Raphael's own coffin, and Britannica
says it stood at the head of his brier
during the funeral rights. This detail
in many ways permanently fuses a
painting to the artist's death in the
cultural imagination. It was not merely
his last masterpiece. It became a
masterpiece seen through the lens of
loss almost immediately. And once you
know that, the painting begins to feel
almost eerily self-aware. The upper half
has the stillness of eternity. The lower
half has the agitation of mortal life.
One zone is beyond suffering. The other
is defined by it. Raphael may not have
intended the painting as a meditation on
his own death, but history has made it
impossible not to read it that way. The
Vatican museums even call it the
artist's spiritual testament. That
phrase is important because
transfiguration does not read like a
simple ending. It reads like a final
statement about the whole human
condition. that we live below in
darkness, noise, sickness,
confrontation, and uncertainty while
straining toward a light we can see but
not yet fully inhabit.
And maybe that is why the painting has
endured with such force. Visari called
it the most famous and most beautiful
and most divine. And even if that sounds
like Renaissance hyperbole, you can
understand why he said it.
Transfiguration is not just powerful
because it's Raphael's last painting. It
is powerful because it stages the very
thing that makes final work so
compelling. The feeling that an artist,
knowingly or not, has pushed beyond
style into something closer to
revelation.
Here, at the end of Raphael's life,
beauty becomes inseparable from crisis.
The divine is still radiant. The world
below is still broken, and the painting
refuses to let us look away from either.
Let us now return to the 20th century
with the last painting of Gustaf
Climpmp, known for his famous painting
titled The Kiss that he completed just
10 years before his death in 1918.
In February of that year, Climp started
painting what is known as the bride,
found unfinished on the easel in his
studio in Heights, alongside the
painting lady with a fan. Some sources
describe the bride as one of the largest
paintings he began in the final year of
his career. What makes the bride so
arresting as a final painting is that it
feels like Climp standing at the edge of
his own style and pushing past it. This
was not some minor sketch abandoned in a
corner. In many ways, from what we know
of its large size and the grand artistic
direction Clint intended for this work,
this was a major last statement,
interrupted rather than resolved. And
you can really sense that interruption
everywhere. The bride does not look
polished into the jewelike completion
people often associate with Climpmp. To
me, it looks more exposed, almost
halfborn. Some passages blaze with color
and ornament while others remain ghostly
skeletal barely pulled into being. Faces
emerge and recede. Bodies are fully
central in one area and almost erased in
another. It is not simply unfinished in
a technical sense. To me, it feels
philosophically unfinished as though
Climpmp died while still wrestling with
what exactly this image was trying to
become. The official descriptions
repeatedly call it a fragmentaryary
allegory. And I think it's worth
focusing on that term for a moment. A
fragment is not just incomplete. A
fragment is a broken piece of something
larger, something we can sense but never
fully recover. Visually, the painting is
dense, almost to a point where it feels
suffocating.
On the left, a tangle of women, flesh,
fabric, hair, and ornament seems to fold
into itself in a kind of erotic swarm.
In the middle, whom many consider to be
the bride, appears calmer and more
self-contained, with her eyes closed and
wearing long braids. On the right,
another female figure rises in a far
more raw and ambiguous form. Her legs
are spread, her head barely worked out,
her body caught between naked exposure
and decorative covering. One article I
came across describes the whole
composition as dense and frame filling.
And an Alpatina story goes even further,
suggesting a three-part structure in
which the left evokes female seduction,
the middle embodies innocence, and the
right may even be read as a bride of
death. Whether or not you accept that
exact interpretation, it captures the
eerie emotional logic of a picture.
Desire on one side, innocence in the
middle, and something darker and
stranger on the other. And that is what
adds a whole new layer to what makes the
bride so much more unsettling than its
title first suggests. Because the word
bride implies union, celebration,
transition into life. But this does not
feel like a simple wedding image. It
feels like Climpmp taking one of the
oldest symbols of erotic promise and
turning it into something deranged,
almost feverish. The Climpmp database
places the work alongside the Virgin and
the death and life paintings as part of
a trio of life cycle pictures and says
that in Climp's later work, eroticism
often goes handinhand with becoming and
perishing. Now, that is an extraordinary
framework for looking at this painting
because once you see it that way, the
rising bodies stop looking merely
decorative or sensual. Instead, they
start to feel like stages of existence
itself, such as youth, desire,
fertility, sleep, and ecstasy, maybe
even exposure, and the shadow of death,
all compressed into one crowded and
unstable field. The eroticism here is
unmistakable. It is not triumphant as
much as it's restless. The Climpmp
database notes that the bride integrates
the erotic energy of his nude studies
into a symbolless narrative and that in
his late drawings he pursued an
increasingly expressive and less
restrained style. You can see that all
over this canvas the bodies no longer
behave like elegant ornaments contained
by pattern. They seem to threaten the
very order that pattern once provided.
When most people think of climps, they
think of golden patterns, surfaces
sealed into beauty and desire
transformed into icon. But the bride
gives us something rougher and more
psychologically open. The Leopold Museum
and the Clint Foundation both stress how
many preparatory studies survive for
this work. More than 100 known studies,
plus roughly 40 pages in his last
sketchbook. That tells us this was not
some careless fragment. It was deeply
thought through. And yet, despite all
that preparation, the final canvas still
feels undissolved, as though Climpmp had
reached a place where his old language
of completion no longer quite fit what
he wanted to say. There is also
something profoundly moving about the
physical evidence of the artist's
absence here. The climp database notes
that a photograph of a studio, probably
taken shortly before his death, shows
the unfinished painting on the easel
with the stool and carpet in front of
it, suggesting that he'd been working on
it very recently. That detail makes a
painting feel almost unbearably
immediate. This is not a distant late
style in the abstract. It's a work that
still carries the atmosphere of
interruption, as though the painter just
stepped away and failed to return. You
can call that a pretty on then way of
describing a painting that an artist
never lived to finish, but it's still an
atmosphere I can't help but think about
because Climp's final image is not one
of peace or completion, but of suspended
becoming. Instead of those figures
settling into a single meaning, they
drift between erotic fantasy, allegory,
dream, and mortality. Some appear
asleep, some ecstatic, some unfinished
enough to look like apparitions.
The painting keeps oscillating between
lushness and erasia, between
consummation and collapse. If a kiss
offered viewers the fantasy of loved
sealed into golden pattern, the bride
feels like the other side of that world.
Desire before completion, identity
before resolution, and life before it
hardens into certainty.
And that may be the true power of Clim's
final painting. Not that it gives us a
definitive last message, but that it
leaves us inside a threshold. A bride is
after all a figure of transition,
someone on the brink of becoming
something else. In that sense, the bride
becomes an almost unbearably apt lost
work. Climp died before he could finish
it. And because of that, the painting
remains trapped in the very state it
seems to depict. Transformation without
arrival. It is erotic for sure, but it's
also spectral. It's full of life, but
already touched by incompleteness, if
that's the right word to use here. And
that is what makes it feel like less of
a final masterpiece in a conventional
sense and more like a vision interrupted
by death itself.
For our next painting, we move into the
mid 1960s to a final work that is far
quieter than Raphael's cosmic drama or
Climp's feverished unfinished bodies,
but no less devastating.
Edward Hopper's two comedians, usually
dated 1966,
is widely regarded as his last completed
painting, made about a year before his
death in 1967.
It now resides in the Bruce Museum, and
from the very beginning, it has been
read as unusually personal within
Hopper's body of work. Before we get
into this painting, I should mention
that one thing I'm a firm believer in is
sometimes less is more. It's part of the
reason why I love artists like Francis
Bacon, especially in his later periods.
He utilized empty space in his
paintings, not merely as a blank
background, but as part of the
atmosphere and to emphasize his central
imagery. And there's a very similar
feeling I get from this particular work
by Hopper. Because what makes two
comedians so powerful is precisely how
simple and minimal it is. We're
presented with two white cloud
performers standing on the stage and
leaning forward to take a bow. Behind
them is an immense field of darkness.
Beside them is only a sliver of scenery,
a thin suggestion of a world beyond the
stage. The title promises comedy, but
there is nothing exuberant here. Nothing
noisy or playful. The image is stripped
almost bare. And that sparseness is
truly worth soaking in because Hopper
spent his career turning ordinary rooms,
streets, restaurants, offices, and
theaters into psychologically charged
spaces. By the time of his last
painting, though, he seems to have
reduced all that down to his bare
essence. Performer, stage, curtain call,
and darkness. That theatrical setting
was not some random late detour. By the
way, Hopper has long been fascinated by
performance spaces, movie houses, and a
strange threshold between watching and
being watched. The Whitney's Edward
Hopper's New York exhibition even
grouped two comedians with works like
New York movie and Intermission
alongside materials related to
productions Edward and his wife
Josephine attended. So when his final
painting takes place on stage, it feels
less like a break from his career than a
culmination of one of his closest and
most personal interests. And yet this
painting is different from the rest of
Hopper's world in one crucial way. It is
almost impossible not to read it as
autobiographical.
Some sources describe the figures as
representation of Hopper himself
alongside his wife on stage together
taking a final bow. And the Bruce
Museum's press material also identifies
them as the painter and Joe dressed as
comedia del characters against a
darkened backdrop. Other long-standing
accounts of a painting also note that
Joe later confirmed it represented the
two of them gracefully bowing out.
Whether we call that a farewell to life,
to art, or to the audience, the
implication is really hard to turn away
from. That is what makes the image so
moving. Hopper is famous for solitude,
distance, and figures who seem locked
inside themselves. The Whitney describes
his work broadly as exploring loneliness
and isolation, and his exhibition text
speaks of his fascination with the
uneasy overlap between public and
private life. Two comedians made that
overlap feel almost painfully direct. As
we know, a stage is by definition a
public place. A final bow is a public
gesture, but what Hopper puts there is
something deeply private, a spectacle
turned into open vulnerability, as if
they're staring mournfully towards the
audience and whispering their last
goodbyes.
The more you look at it, the stranger
and more genius that juxtaposition
becomes as well. The figures are dressed
like comedians, but they look far from
comical. They look solemn, almost
fragile. Their white costumes glow
against the dark background, almost as
if they're more like ghosts than people.
The empty space around them is enormous
as well. And because there is no visible
audience, the bow starts to feel oddly
existential, as though they're bowing
not just to the crowd, but to the void
itself.
Even the composition feels like a
threshold image. The performers are
still here, still visible, but only
just. They seem on the verge of stepping
out of the light and into something far
more mysterious and unknown to us.
There's just something so poignant and
perfect about it. Even though we can
never know for sure if Hopper truly
intended this painting to be his last.
The imagery pulls everything back until
almost nothing remains. No crowded city,
no cluttered room, no elaborate
narrative, just two figures, a stage,
and a darkness that threatens to swallow
them. Again, whether it was deliberate
or not, it truly feels like the work of
an artist who seems to understand that
endings are rarely loud. Very often,
they are quiet, formal, and ritualized.
It just seems to perfectly encapture a
gesture performed with dignity while
standing at the edge of disappearance.
I also feel we need to address Hopper's
wife, Joe, a little bit more here
because there's something deeply
affecting about her presence in this
work. Across Hopper's career, Josephine
was not only his wife, but someone who
truly completed him. She was his model,
archivist, and artistic partner in ways
that shaped his entire legacy. In two
comedians, the image is not of Hopper
alone, but of the two of them together,
hand in hand. For a painter so often
associated with emotional separation,
that feels extraordinary. It's as though
at the very end, the solitary world of
Edward Hopper makes room for
companionship. Not sentimental
companionship or romantic idealism, but
something quieter and perhaps more
honest. It's essentially two aging
figures acknowledging that the
performance is over and leaving a stage
together side by side. And maybe that is
why two comedians lingers in a mind so
stubbornly because it feels like a
theatrical scene turned into a final act
of self-standing.
Hopper, who spent decades painting
people suspended in moments of waiting,
watching, and isolation ends by painting
the one moment that comes after all of
those, the bow, the acknowledgement, the
final exit. It is simple, restrained,
and almost unbearably lucid. And that
lucidity may be what makes it one of the
most powerful final paintings of all.
Not because it dramatizes death, but
because it quietly accepts the fact that
every artist eventually must step back
from the light.
The next painting we'll be looking at is
a pretty well-known final painting and
in my opinion, one of the saddest. This
one is simply titled Unfinished Painting
Created by Keith Herring in 1989.
What makes me think it's one of the
saddest is that its title is not poetic
exaggeration. The work is unfinished in
the most literal confrontational sense.
In the upper left portion of a canvas,
we see what we usually know and love
from Keith Herring. The bold black
contours, the white interior marks, and
that dense rhythmic tangle of simplified
bodies and symbols set against a purple
ground. And then suddenly it just stops.
The image breaks off into a jagged edge.
Purple paint drips downwards and most of
the canvas remains bare. Smithsonian
notes that Herring intentionally left
the work unfinished as a commentary on
the AIDS crisis, which means the
blankness is not an accident, not an
abandoned sketch, not a painting like
the bride, where it was simply left
unfinished due to the artist's death,
but the core of a statement itself. It
was almost like Herring knew he was
going to die at any moment and wanted to
paint that abrupt and uncertain end in
his work.
As a lot of you may well know, Herring
built his reputation on a visual
language that felt immediate, public,
and alive. The Keith Herring Foundation
describes his art as communicating
universal ideas like birth, death, love,
sex, and war through direct imagery and
line. While Smithsonian, quoting a
foundation, notes that his subway
drawings became known for their rapid,
seamless flow of images. In other words,
Herring's art usually has a lot of
movement to it. It spreads and
multiplies, and the unfinished painting
we have here does the opposite. It
confronts us with a place that flow has
been severed and left to its own devices
by the trickling paint we can see. It's
like the usual meticulous and intricate
imagery Herring is known for has just
given up a third of a way through and
has been left to sink to the bottom. And
this sudden severance is exactly why the
empty canvas feels so haunting. The
white space does not read like calm or
openness. It reads more like a complete
interruption. It serves as a void that
has swallowed the rest of the image
before it could come into being. And I
just can't seem to take my eyes away
from those drips of purple paint. They
look like the residue of momentum
creating a world of vitality, wit,
sexuality, and motion that suddenly cut
off mid-sentence.
And on that note, I feel it's important
to understand the context in which
Herring made it. The Keith Herring
Foundation states that he was diagnosed
with AIDS in 1988. And in a Rolling
Stone interview in 1989, Herring spoke
publicly about being HIV positive and
having developed Caposi saroma. Last
fall, MTV News interviewed Keith for our
decade special and he bravely talked
about how learning to live with AIDS had
changed the way he looked at death and
dying. The thing that surprised me a lot
is that um you find ways to adapt to it
somehow. I mean, I never thought that I
would be able to deal with death or even
be able to think about death in the way
that I do now because I've seen it a
whole different way. I mean after having
the experience of really watching
um watching death and especially um
because unfortunately AIDS is a very um
the disease itself is um can be very
painful and very um very ugly disease. I
mean it's not it's not pretty. It's not
it's not um painless and it's not quick.
And so there's a lot of sort of
suffering that goes with the thing and
there's a lot of sort of pain that
you've got to sort of deal with,
psychological and physical pain.
>> Not long afterwards, he died of AIDS
related complications on February 16th,
1990 at the age of just 31 years old. So
when you stand before this painting, you
are not just looking at a clever
conceptual gesture. You're looking at an
artist who knew with terrible certainty
that time had become finite.
And what is so striking about herring is
that he did not retreat into silence in
the ordinary sense. If anything, he
became more direct. The foundation notes
that before his death, he established
the Keith Herring Foundation in 1989
with support for children and for AIDS
related education, prevention, and care
at its core. His late years were not
defined only by illness, but a refusal
to separate art from public urgency.
This is fundamental because unfinished
painting can easily be read as personal,
even autobiographical.
But yet, it's bigger than that. It's not
just about Keith Herring's own life
being cut short. It's about the
thousands of lives, relationships, and
futures, and creative possibilities
being cut short all around him during
the AIDS epidemic.
There is also something deeply and
morbidly fascinating about the fact that
the part that he does paint is so
recognizably harring. He does not
abandon his signature language here, nor
does he switch into some new solemn
tragic style. The dancing forms, the
cartoon-like compression, the playful
visual pulse, they are all still there.
To me that shows the tragedy does not
come from a visible collapse in artistic
ability and instead comes from something
far cruer. The star remains alive but
the future in which it would have
continued is missing. The painting is
not saying I can no longer paint. It is
saying there will not be enough time.
And that is a pretty harrowing thought
to sit with. Looking back at the other
paintings we've seen, we saw that Van
Go's tree roots felt like life fighting
in the dirt. Hopper's two comedians
feels like a dignified last bow. But
Harring's final gesture is more brutal.
He doesn't present us with visual chaos
or a theatrical farewell. He instead
lets his signature style sink into a
blank space where a life and a body of
work should have continued.
In that sense, the untouched canvas
becomes a monument to everything that
never got the chance to exist. There is
a pretty big irony in that, too, because
Herring once said that there would
always be things left undone, no matter
how long someone lived, and that making
art was kind of a quest for immortality.
Those ideas become almost unbearable
when placed beside this painting. Here,
the things left undone are no longer
abstract. They have been given a shape
and a body of their own. Or rather,
they've been given the shape of
blankness.
Herring turns unfinished life into
unfinished form and makes absence
visible. Sort of like how musicians
sometimes say, silence can be just as
powerful and inspiring as audible
sounds. Or like I mentioned earlier, how
Francis Bacon used empty space to give
his imagery more presence and
atmosphere. And maybe the strongest
proof of a painting's power is that
people still struggle to accept its
incompletion.
In 2024, when an AI generated completed
version of a work circulated online, the
backlash was intense to say the least.
Critics argued, I would say quite
rightly, that finishing it erased the
point because the blankness is the
meaning. To me, that controversy pretty
much reveals that people are often left
uncomfortable with art that refuses a
resolution. We want endings to be filled
in, explained, and repaired. But Herring
denies us that comfort by leaving a
wound wide open. To conclude, I feel
like this work is certainly not subtle
about mortality, but is far more
simplistic. It takes the bright,
democratic, instantly recognizable
language of herring, and lets it die on
the canvas in front of us, not with
spectacle or melodrama, just with an
abrupt stop. And that stop says
everything. It tells us that this is
what the Ace crisis did. Not only death,
but interruption. Not only grief, but
stolen continuation.
not only the end of lives but the
erasure of all the work, love, growth,
and becoming that would have followed.
In that sense, unfinished painting is
more than a last work. It is a refusal
to pretend that the story was allowed to
finish. And that is exactly why it still
hurts for me.
So, the last painting we'll be looking
at today is titled The Beyond, painted
by Georgia O'Keeffe, and one of my
favorite final paintings of all time.
Not just because of the painting itself,
but the story behind it. You might be
clocking onto a pattern now when it
comes to my tastes and art when I say
this, but what makes a Beyond so
powerful is that it feels at once
enormous and almost impossibly simple.
The Georgia O'Keeffe Museum describes
the composition in very plain terms. The
lower third is a broad band of black.
The upper portion is filled with several
variations of blue and a thin strip of
white cuts horizontally between them. On
paper, that sounds almost unremarkable.
But in person or even in reproduction,
it feels like standing before a horizon
that has been stripped down to its final
emotional elements. Darkness below,
distance above, and a line of light
separating the two. The museum's
catalog, Reson, also identifies it as
O'Keefe's last unassisted oil painting,
which immediately changes the way we
look at it. This is not just another
late abstraction. It is the last moment
in which she painted an oil canvas
entirely by herself before failing
vision forced her to work differently.
The O'Keeffe Museum states that she was
suffering from macular degeneration and
failing vision. And although her last
unassisted oil painting came in 1972,
her urge to create did not diminish.
Later in life, almost completely blind,
she continued making art with the help
of her assistants.
So the beyond sits on a kind of
precipice in a life, not the end of
creativity altogether, but the end of a
certain physical independence
that makes the painting feel less like a
simple landscape and more like a
threshold. The last unmediated crossing
between her eye, her hand, and the
canvas.
Visually, it's one of the most austere
final paintings we've looked at. There
are no roots twisting in agony, no
crowds and spiritual crisis, no
theatrical figures taken about. There is
only a vast black mass, a cold blue
expanse, and that narrow white seam
between them. But that restraint is
exactly what makes it so profound to me.
It really does feel like you're staring
into a void. The blue above feels
atmospheric, but also remote, thinning
into something unreachable. and the
white line between them is so delicate
that it reads almost like the last
possible barrier between presence and
disappearance.
The title, the beyond in of itself is
such a strange open phrase. It does not
tell us whether we're looking at sky,
water, land, emptiness, memory, or the
afterlife. And according to a recent
piece in New Mexico magazine drawing on
commentary around the work at the
Georgia O'Keeffe Museum, it has been
posited that O'Keefe may have been
thinking about what comes after death or
what will come after when she can no
longer paint or simply what lies beyond
the image itself.
That uncertainty feels crucial because
instead of illustrating death in a
literal way, it approaches it the way
O'Keefe approached so many things in her
other paintings indirectly through
space, edge, atmosphere, and the
emotional power of reduction.
And I think that's what makes this
painting so moving. O'Keeffe had spent
decades proving that a landscape, a
flower, a bone, or a strip of sky could
be made to feel metaphysical without
ever abandoning the physical world. Here
at the end, she seems to reduce that
impulse to its purest form. The painting
still suggests a place, some kind of
horizon or meeting of the elements, but
it is so simplified that it begins to
slip beyond description and become
something incredibly abstract.
it becomes less a visual than a
condition of a mind, less a scene than a
confrontation of the unknown.
On that point, I find that the New
Mexico magazine discussing a museum's
exhibition, radical abstraction, notes
that abstraction remains a lifelong
concern for her and that the beyond
brings viewers full circle in a sense.
This basically means that this painting
is not some accidental late
simplification caused only by failing
eyesight. It is also a return to one of
the deepest currents in her whole
career. She began pushing away from
strict representation toward more
personal distilled forms. And in this
late work, she arrives again at an image
balance between landscape and pure
abstraction. In a way, she ends where
she began, but with a full weight of a
lifetime now behind the gesture. So yes,
the context of her vision loss is
crucial. And yes, a black band can feel
like death, blindness, or oblivion. But
the painting is not only dark, it also
contains that luminous white line and
that immense field of blue. There is
severity here, but not despair. The
title itself leans outward rather than
downward. It suggests continuation and
not just blatant annihilation.
Even if Akef was meditating on death of
a time, she seems to have imagined it
not as a crowded drama or a tragic
spectacle, but as a vast silent
threshold.
And in that sense, her final unassisted
painting does not cry out. It barely
even speaks. It just stands there calm
and immovable like a horizon you cannot
cross but cannot stop staring at either.
There is one more detail that a film
makes the work almost unbearably
intimate. On the back of a canvas, the
O'Keefe Museum records an inscription in
graphite reading, quote, "last one for
slash not a." Sadly, we don't really
know how to interpret that fragment. And
maybe we shouldn't try to force it into
a neat meaning. But if I was to take a
punt at it and even without certainty
have to admit the presence of those
words on the reverse of his painting
gives it an eerie physical finality. It
reminds us that this was not only later
labeled by historians as the last work.
It was marked in some way as final from
within the life of the object itself.
And maybe that is why the beyond is a
big favorite of mine because it feels
like a painting made by someone who
understood that endings do not always
arrive as explosions or with drama.
Sometimes they arrive as horizons, as a
dark band, as a thin line of light, as a
title that gestures towards something no
one can fully name. O'Keefe could no
longer rely on her sight in the same way
she once had, but she could still do
what all great artists do at the very
end. turn limitation into vision. And
here that vision is just stunning. Not
simply a meditation on death, but on
whatever lies just past it. A place
where seeing fails and the unknown
begins.
Thank you for watching this video. I
really hope you found it interesting and
apologies if I didn't include other
final paintings you were patiently
waiting for me to explore with you. With
that said, I'm very tempted to make a
part two video to this in future. So, if
you're thinking, "What the hell, Blind
Dweller? Why didn't you include this
painting or that painting?" Well, please
let me know in the comments, and I'll be
sure to look into it if I get round to
doing another final paintings video.
Before I shoot off, it's that time again
for Artist Corner, where I get to share
some incredible artwork sent in by one
of my talented viewers. And today's
featured artist is Cindy Miller. Cindy
is an artist based in Huntsville,
Alabama, USA. She tells me she often
uses her art to help manage her bipolar
disorder, and that many of the images
she creates deal with darker imagery,
but she says she also finds beauty in
both the light and dark art that she
produces. A lot of these skeletal images
you can see here are part of a bone
series, a collection where Cindy uses
the motif of bones to create figures,
generally in isolation, reflecting how
she often feels when she descends into
depressive states. Cindy, in fact, has a
degree in anthropology and archaeology,
so skeletons are a motif she uses quite
often. She tells me how she loved
analyzing bones in the field and how she
loves doing the same thing as an artist.
Although Cindy thinks people often
assume because she paints with this
motif that these images are really
depressing, she says she often finds
them hopeful. And there is something
strangely elegant and beautiful about
them. Cindy says she loves the patterns
and rhythm that the bones produce
against the dark backgrounds. And I have
to say, the way the bones weave and
blend together so intricately to create
skin, bodies, and other objects like
cages and trees is so mesmerizing. and
her icy color palette in most of these
works make them feel so cold and
unforgiving yet also serene and
ethereal. I really couldn't wait to
share her work at the end of this video.
And I really hope you're tempted to
check out more of her art via the links
you see on screen or in the video
description below. If you too are an
artist and would like to feature in one
of my videos, I'd love to meet you.
Simply send me an email to blind
dweller@gmail.com
with examples of your work and a
paragraph or two about yourself.
Remember, it's your story I want to
tell. That's all for me today. See you
in the next video soon. Keep being
creative and bye for now.